* IDEA / PROBLEM: A description of the idea, which global issue it addresses, and why you believe it represents an opportunity for impact, as well as a detailed sense of any progress you have made pursuing the venture to date (partners, customers, team, etc.)

The majority of US health data reside on systems provided by a few major EMR vendors whose core databases are designed around 50 year-old constraints of 1960s computer hardware. These systems are unwieldy to integrate with, tied deeply to outdated processor and data architectures, and difficult to improve. Many leading vendor systems are still years behind on compliance with established standards such as HL7 CDA or even basic interchange formats like DICOM.  

The technical difficulty in updating and improving these systems is further slowed by the need for significant planning and cost-benefit analysis and is hamstrung at the start by one its key weaknesses - poor interoperability. Further, incumbent vendors are disincented from doing so; difficult and expensive integrations combined with a lack of interoperability provides a strong disincentive for customers to change vendors and acts as a barrier to market entry for competitors.

Most healthcare organizations are left beholden a monolithic integrated solution that controls their business or painstakingly wire these tools together in an ad-hoc fashion. Either option buttresses a rigid framework that locks them into expensive vendor contracts, systems that cannot interact, and potentially subpar health outcomes. Proprietary integration formats, and the famous lack of interoperability they cause are one of if not the primary fundamental limiting factor on most medical research, IT, and care process innovation.

FHIR, or Fast Health Interoperability Resources, is a draft specification developed by international organization HL7 over the past few years and is a major improvement over current methods. It’s been eagerly promoted by well-known IT leaders because it far exceeds the capacities of current formats. Most importantly, it is highly aligned with national goals for interoperability by the US government and is much more similar to the kinds of tools that have powered the modern internet and world wide web.

SMART is an open-source health data access API that provides standardized authentication, identity management, and data delivery scoping for application developers. It was designed to provide developer friendly access through a simple RESTful API, while maintaining the robust security required in healthcare. It is beginning to attract attention from web designers for its ease of use and compatibility with modern internet conventions. It was also built right here at Boston Children’s by our lead Advisor, Josh Mandel!
If you need to cut some words - maybe get rid of some of the technical stuff in the prior two paragraphs?

FHIR and SMART complement each other. They are openly-produced, vendor-neutral, and useful for developing across any type of device, and have generated significant community interest because of their suitability to form the framework for a competitive ecosystem of truly interoperable applications. We believe in this outcome and are supporting their adoption together through the creation and promotion of the Smartfhir (‘smart fire’) platform along with a platform management tool called FHIRControl.
need to add a paragraph to respond to the part of the questionon progress you have made to include: initial team, demo product, and customer meetings and potential pilots


* PLAN: A description of the product / programs / services you intend to provide 

Our main product, FHIRControl, uses FHIR and SMART to create an API-as-a-Service for hospitals. We manage the painful data integration work and securely expose data on our controlled platform to developers, startups, and innovators authorized by the hospitals. This allows any product to be easily integrated with (or likewise removed from) the hospital’s EMR and other data sources. It creates a platform that disintermediates the big vendors, so that their inertia does not limit the huge range of new tools and ideas that can be built to better serve hospitals, researchers, and patients. We serve as a gateway for the providers to easily try, trust, and buy any application, or fire them in the same style as your phone and tablet. Hospitals get access to a competitive marketplace of FHIR compliant applications, and vendors get a platform and sales channel to customers.

* IMPACT: Your specific hypotheses about the underlying causes of the problem you are attacking, the reasons why you hold those hypotheses, why you believe your proposed solution will work, what data will constitute a confirmation or disconfirmation of those hypotheses, and how you will collect and analyze that data

We are using technology to solve a market and systems problem. Large EMR vendors that dominate the market do not have an incentive the make integration or data sharing easy. Though these companies say that they are ‘open platforms,’ their underlying data models and architecture have undergone no work to improve the integration and record-sharing problem. By remaining closed, they succeed in staying embedded in hospitals operations but stymie progress and efficiency.

Fortunately, all EMR vendors must collaborate and integrate to the extent demanded by their provider clients.  Based on our initial conversations with potential clients, we believe clients are hungry to demand this if and when they believe such a solutions exists.  We have access to talented Epic/Meditech/Cerner integrators. If we integrate with the EMR, then using our expertise and platform, any other company that wants to build can do so without having to deal the the EMR vendor ever again. Because our API makes use of open standards wherever possible, we help to promote standards and create a competitive landscape of HIT applications that currently doesn’t exist. Our solution will work because we lower costs for hospitals, get them much better applications that they currently have, and make their lives much, much easier. Startups and innovators like us because they get a market to sell into without having to worry about integrations and the enterprise sales process.
need to address the part of the question about collecting data to confirm or disconfirm your hypothesis	

* SUSTAINABILITY: A detailed accounting of the specific resources you will need to accomplish this, the identified sources of those resources (e.g., web developers, prototypes, etc.) and the cost of those resources. Also indicate what resources you may already have raised or invested in the venture. During the second stage of the Challenge, you may be asked to produce invoices or receipts to show how the original prize money was invested in pursuing your proposal.

We need to get our team's frontend and backend developers together with Josh Mandel and myself, so we can all work on the product together to fully transition from the cobbled-together open source demonstration we currently have to the alpha version of the product we want to deliver. This is be mostly travel costs and paying for design time from of our allies here in Boston. There is no equity stake held by any other entity other than Levin Brown, who has bootstrapped/self-funded most of the cost he and his team members have incurred so far. We’d love to show off the results of the work we can get done for $5000!


* What specific results the first-stage $5,000 prize money is designed to provide and how the results will help the team progress with executing the proposal to provide solution.

Our team is distributed between Boston, RTP, and Silicon Valley. The $5,000 will help us all get together here at the iLab and work for a sprint/hackathon to really make progress on the product. We will do preliminary development preparation, sprint planning, and then show up and work our tails off together getting out a clean MVP.

We also want to treat that time as a planning meeting as well, so we can see where were are at on a number of issues, bond as a team, and make a plan to go ahead with our pilot customers this spring. We are really excited that the Dean’s Challenge could be the event that brings us all together and lights a fire on our product.

Additionally, remaining money will be used to get our demonstration product out infront of customers. We need to travel to build relationships with Chief Information, Quality, and Medical Officers, get as much market feedback as possible, and make sure we are pointing our project in the right direction. We think we have decent product-market fit for the moment, but there is still very much that we need to learn.
 Maybe put together a simple spreadsheet table to account for the $5k (in broad categories so it seems less fuzzy than in the writing)
