FLEET Health: Enhancing Interoperability through FHIR Technology
Lowering Costs and Improving Patient Outcomes
Group 10: Ana Amaris, D. Levin Brown, M. Cooper Lloyd, and Elisabeth Rodman

Executive Summary
The lack of interoperability in today’s health information technology (IT) systems leads to incomplete patient data and extraordinarily high costs. Integrating all of the various IT systems within a hospital or health system and then sharing pertinent patient data across health systems is expensive, time consuming, and burdensome. FLEET Health seeks to employ new interoperability standards (HL7 FHIR) to provide health systems with a solution to the siloed IT environment. Using the hospital’s electronic health record (EHR) data, FLEET creates an interoperable data platform upon which providers can integrate various IT systems. FLEET also provides a competitive AppStore to give hospitals access to a variety of easy-to-integrate health applications. FLEET Health will upgrade IT systems by providing greater interoperability, improved patient data, and cost savings in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Problem Statement 
In 2009, the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act made billions of dollars available to support EHR uptake throughout the United States. By 2013 more than 50 percent of eligible physicians had demonstrated meaningful use and received an incentive payment, while 80 percent of eligible hospitals had adopted the systems.  However, despite the growing adoption of EHRs, their full potential has yet to be achieved. 
In particular, EHRs have not generated the cost savings that were projected. ,  In an analysis of the gap between current and potential EHR outcomes, Kellerman and Jones identify interoperability as a key criterion for EHRs moving forward.  Interoperability refers to the “ability to communicate and exchange data accurately among different IT systems, software applications, and networks.”  Currently, health information resides in “proprietary silos;”  providers are unable to share health information electronically with the colleagues and services with whom they most frequently interact. As Brailer has noted, the consumer choice that characterizes the US health care system and is routinely viewed as desirable morphs into a fragmented consumer health experience without system-wide integration and interoperability.  
Consumer and provider experiences today are indeed fragmented due to a lack of interoperability in EHRs. Providers do not have access to longitudinal records for their patients. Consumers are unable to benefit from personal health records, even though greater than 60 percent of people report desiring online access to their own medical records.  Medical errors and duplication of services persist because information remains in silos. Abundant data useful for public health monitoring, bioterrorism surveillance, quality monitoring, and advances in clinical trials remains inaccessible to the institutions that could translate it into a public benefit.  Providers and consumers are largely unable to capitalize on the burgeoning field of health care applications because platforms allowing integration of software do not exist.
Such fragmentation is costly. Welker et al. quantify the national cost-savings that could result from fully standardized health care information exchange and interoperability as $77.8 billion per year, once fully implemented.  These savings are estimated to result from connectivity between providers and independent laboratories, radiology centers, pharmacies, payers, and public health departments and do not include additional benefits of interoperability such as improved patient safety and quality of care. In addition to savings that are not being realized, provider groups continue to spend large proportions of their budgets on health IT.
	With standards such as HL7 now in place, much of the blame for the current system lies in the hands of EHR vendors themselves. As Mandl and Kohane write, “most EHR companies have failed to innovate and don’t even embrace existing modular architectures with interfaces that allow extension of product capabilities, innovative uses of data, and interoperation with other software.”  EHR vendors have preferred to control the data and set rules for use themselves, hindering the evolution of health IT infrastructure. With more than 700 EHR vendors now producing approximately 1,750 distinct certified products, these silos are unsustainable. The potential for new companies to offer dynamic, cheaper, interoperable products signaling the beginning of a post-EHR period is great. 

Company Description
FLEET Health believes that interoperability is the biggest technical problem in medicine, and the FHIR and SMART projects are the tools that can solve it. FLEET Health will provide an open source, interoperable, application development and purchasing platform for hospitals and provider groups. We build, install, and maintain an interoperable ‘FHIR Control’ platform, which manages several FHIR-compliant health data servers alongside the hospitals’ current EHR systems. Additionally, we provide an interoperable FHIR-compliant AppStore, allowing hospitals to evaluate, purchase, and selectively use applications with no integration and no sales process. This AppStore environment allows hospitals to gain access to a competitive marketplace. 
FLEET is different from the current IT providers. Its business model is not centered on the one-time sale of software like traditional IT vendors; we do not aim to be a capital expense for hospitals. Our plan is to implement and maintain interoperable FHIR standards using a ‘Software-as-a-Service’ model for hospitals. FLEET will charge $50,000 per hospital per year for hardware and software maintenance, with discounts for multi-hospitals systems. In addition, we will charge $200 per month per Smartfhir application to the hospital, along with a 10% cut of the fee charged by each application to the hospital per month.
With the creation of a new application market, known as the AppStore, we believe that increased competition will lead to lower application pricing and greater application functionality. Vendors selling through the AppStore must comply with FHIR interoperability standards to ensure ease of use for hospitals and health systems. Those that do not comply with the FHIR specification will pay FLEET a service fee to normalize their data.
FLEET’s location in Boston and its connections to the nation’s top health tech regions of New York, Research Triangle Park, and Silicon Valley have allowed us to access top IT talent. FLEET’s leadership and advisory team have personal connections with leading health technology incubators and a long established presence in the startup ecosystem. FLEET speaks the language of startups, can attract them to build for hospitals, and is well prepared to provide service and support for these early adopters to the Smartfhir platform.
FLEET is committed to demonstrating the power of this platform and providing excellent IT services to our hospital and health system partners. This low-cost, low-risk, incremental approach to integration and change is a modern approach to the health sector’s emerging IT needs.

Market Analysis
The health IT market in the US is growing, indicating a continued need for improved IT solutions; BCC Research, a market research company covering science and technology, estimated the total market for clinical health care IT to be $11.2 billion in 2012, up from $9.5 billion in 2011, and projected growth to approximately $26.1 billion in 2017 with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 18.5 percent over the next five years.  The EHR segment comprised the largest share of the health IT market in the BCC analysis at 57.6 percent in 2011, and EHR is growing faster than other market segments. With a CAGR of 20 percent, its market share is expected to increase to 62 percent by 2017.  BCC divides the market into the additional segments of provider order entry, telemedicine, laboratory information systems, prescription drug fulfillment, and clinical decision support, categories that reflect the current fragmentation of health IT as it is currently conceptualized in the US. Growth is projected in the market for all other health IT sectors as well.  
Further, hospitals and provider entities will be specifically searching for products with interoperability. A recent Gartner report to CIOs faced with choosing between competing megasuite vendors (such as Epic or Cerner) urged the decision makers to hinge their choices on interoperability.  The report cautions, “Without a clear strategy for this foundational capability [interoperability], CIOs will likely evolve their organizations’ capabilities at the pace of the vendor, and may find themselves out of the driver’s seat and in the back seat of change, along for the ride.”  FLEET responds to this call for interoperability, capturing the market early as the demand quickly evolves.
FLEET’s specific market will be comprised of hospitals that have not already dedicated substantial resources to EHR uptake. Of 4,472 hospitals non-federal acute care hospitals in the US in 2013, 2,655 (59.4 percent) had adopted a basic EHR by 2013, leaving 1,817 without.  Hospital adoption of EHRs ranged from 26 percent to 83 percent by state, signaling the market’s openness, albeit to varying degrees, in all states. What other specifics would be helpful re: FLEET’s specific market? We believe a realistic goal for FLEET is to operate within five percent of these hospitals without basic EHR systems in the next five years. As Exhibit B shows, we anticipate contracting with 60 provider systems in the first three years.

Management Team
FLEET’s multidisciplinary management team includes:
•	Chief Executive Officer (CEO): Management and business expert tasked with procuring contracts, managing operations, monitoring profitability, and measuring and improving client cost savings achieved through FLEET.
•	Chief Information Officer (CIO): Information technology expert charged with ensuring successful delivery of contracted services, collaborating with clients’ IT staff, managing FLEET’s data coders (those implementing the interoperable platform in hospitals, clinics, and health systems), and informing the team of pertinent IT rules and regulations.
•	Chief Medical Officer (CMO): Clinician responsible for ensuring that FLEET’s platform incorporates the needs of hospital administrators and medical providers and improves patient care. The CMO will be essential in the advertising and sales processes.
FLEET’s management team anticipates meeting regularly with its nine-member Advisory Board, which includes: IT leaders (2 members), entrepreneur (1 member), hospital administrators (2 members), medical professionals (2 members), and consumer representatives (2 members). 

Implementation Timeline 
During 2014, FLEET has collaborated with health systems, secured office space, created a management team, and identified key IT issues potential clients are currently facing. Once FLEET contracts with an individual provider group, the three-month timeline to ensure successful deployment and integration with the client’s IT systems will be as follows: 
Implementation Event	Project Week
Security and Business Associate Agreements. As required by HIPAA law, FLEET will secure a formal data agreement with client.	0-1
Clinical and Administrative Needs Assessment. Prioritize individual client needs.	2-4
Data Source Assessment and Constraints Review. Analyze client’s current platform and needs.	5-6
Dependency, Sequencing, and Critical Path Review. Once extent of interoperability tasks have been identified, map out work flow order.	7-8
FHIR Demo Server Hardware Setup and Data Connection. Demonstrate product capabilities without integrating with client EHR.	9-12
FHIR Data Normalization. Integrate client EHR with FLEET platform.	13-20
SMART Setup and Applications Demonstration. Security protocols established to allow for third-party integration.	21-22
Local Data Center Application Demonstration. Demonstrate applications inside client’s secure network.	23-25
Web Partner AppStore Application Demonstration. Demonstrate applications outside client’s secure network via AppStore.	26-32
Full-scale Deployment Assessment. Implementation and revision for deployment of all FLEET capabilities throughout client system. 	33-36

Stakeholder Analysis
Hospitals and Providers: There is significant evidence that demand among health care providers for a low-cost, interoperable health information technology platform, such as the solution offered by FLEET, is high. A 2014 New York Times article states: “fewer than half of the nation’s hospitals can transmit a patient care document, while only 14 percent of physicians can exchange patient data with outside hospitals or other providers.”  A 2013 RAND study notes that physicians are most frustrated by the difficulty of use, lack of interoperability, and high costs of EHRs. One provider noted that even within an individual hospital system, IT platforms often cannot communicate internally.  In a Medical Economics publication, Dr. Pankaj Desai elaborates on the exact problem that FLEET will solve: that there is no one platform currently available to providers on which to build a connected system. He writes, “Because of the hundreds of the current vendors, each on different platforms, we continue to have a dysfunctional and very expensive industry that does no favors to the practicing physicians to improve care.”  
Apps and Vendors: Many third-party applications already have the ability to plug into standard IT platforms and would likely support FLEET’s efforts to create a single, interoperable, IT platform and an AppStore on which to connect. FLEET’s platform would foster application deployment into a range of health settings, improving provider access to new tools and bolstering vendor sales. Examples of such applications include:
•	Tonic:  Replaces paper patient intake forms with electronic ones, collects patient satisfaction information, and generates real-time data, among other functions; and
•	ACT.md:  An application geared towards improving care coordination, clearly defining roles, promoting more successful handoffs, and measuring team performance.
Federal Government: Hospitals, provider organizations, and clinics that are considering hiring FLEET to manage their interoperable IT platform will want to know that this system is supported by the federal government. Therefore, it should be noted that the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) is committed to improving health information exchange, and one of ONC’s main goals is to ensure that by 2024 “providers, communities, and researchers… have an array of interoperable health IT products and services…[that] enable lower health care costs, improved population health, truly empower consumers, and drive innovation.”  The federal HIT Policy and Standards committees recommended in October of this year that ONC can achieve that goal with the new FHIR specifications, which are the backbone of FLEET’s interoperable platform. 


SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats) Analysis
STRENGTHS	WEAKNESSES
1)	Greater Interoperability and Improved Patient Care: The open platform technology enables better data sharing, which holds the potential for more complete patient information, a reduction in medical errors, and better patient care.

2)	Promotes Healthy Competition: The AppStore will serve as a market, generating third-party vendor competition, increasing sales, lowering prices, and promoting quality.

3)	Modern Technology: Forward-thinking open platform technology will best prepare health systems for the future.	1)	Time Lag in Cost Savings: This model creates more upfront costs than benefits. The significant savings will be generated years after implementation. Although the costs are minimal, CIOs looking to for immediate cost savings may not appreciate the benefits of this approach.

2)	May Make Enemies Out of Large EHR Providers: Dominant EHR providers benefit from a lack of interoperability and their monopoly (or oligopoly) status. FLEET may not be able to work collaboratively with such vendors due to the differences in goals.
OPPORTUNITIES	THREATS
1)	Ability to Work with Small and Midsize Providers: Many currently available EHRs are too expensive for small and midsized providers to purchase and implement. FLEET’s modest startup cost of $50,000 and maintenance cost of $200/month makes it an affordable option for provider organizations of all sizes. 

2)	Partnership with Vendors: Because the FLEET business model benefits third-party vendors, it providers an opportunity for collaboration.	1)	Existing EHR Vendors Tactics May Prohibit Entry Into Market: Large EHR providers may work to discredit the value of FLEET in order to maintain market dominance. 

2)	Market Competition: FHIR standards and open platform technologies are very popular. Other start-up companies may emerge and take away potential clients from FLEET.

3)	New Standards May Surpass FHIR: Although unlikely, new and improved standards could surpass FHIR technology before significant cost savings are achieved.

Financial Analysis
A modest investment in FLEET today means large cost savings in the future. According to conversations with hospital executives, health systems with substantial inpatient capacity typically spend between three and five percent of their total budget on information technology. Outpatient settings spend slightly less, between two and four percent. Cost savings will depend upon the size of the client organizations. FLEET’s goal is to save 0.5 to 1 percent of the client’s total operating costs by moving a heath system’s data to a modern, interoperable platform, allowing for future EHR and application savings.
In the short term, FLEET will reduce provider costs by creating a competitive market for health care applications in its AppStore. The AppStore will allow for lower application costs (as custom tailoring each application will no longer be necessary) and more transparent pricing. Exhibit A demonstrates that health systems could save $10,000 to $80,000 on the integration costs for each application they employ. Given that many hospitals use hundreds of different pieces of software each year, health systems could generate savings of hundreds of thousands of dollars each year. 
FLEET’s long-term goal is to allow hospitals to avoid full-scale EHR vendor implementation processes, generating significant cost-savings. FLEET will ready the health system’s data to sync with an interoperable EHR application. Because such an EHR system requires little retrofitting, these products will be far less expensive and easier to maintain. 
For a close look at FLEET’s expected revenues and expenses in years one through three of operation, please see Exhibit B. This income statement is based on the fee schedule of a per-hospital startup charge of $50,000 and a monthly maintenance fee of $200, as well as a surcharge of 10% of profits for third-party vendors selling applications through the AppStore. As demonstrated in Exhibit 1, FLEET is a lean organization with salary and benefits constituting the largest expense. FLEET expects to generate more than $1.5 million in profits in the first three years alone.

Evaluation of Adverse Consequences
Given that FLEET operates as a data server for different health care applications, privacy and safety of patient information represent major concerns. A breach of patient confidentiality would present a major adverse consequence of FLEET’s new platform. FLEET will ensure full compliance with federal rules and regulations pertaining to personal health information security. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which concerns the transition to EHRs, requires that patients and the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) be notified of a confidentiality breach via mail within 60 days. Individuals must be provided with the company’s contact information to discuss the breach.  Additionally, in January 2013, HHS issued the “Megarule” to further strengthen the privacy and security of health information under HIPAA by expanding many of the requirements to contractors and subcontractors of entities that receive protected health information such as health care providers, health plans and other entities that process health insurance claims. The changes also strengthen the HITECH Breach Notification requirements by clarifying when breaches of unsecured health information must be reported to HHS. 
However, today the resolution of concerns regarding the privacy of EHRs and medical information shared through electronic platforms lies in the development of new security technologies rather than legislation or regulation. Recent history shows that the great majority of computer security systems are vulnerable to intrusion by knowledgeable hackers. Between 2006 and 2012 alone, 767 security breaches resulted in the compromised health information of more than 23.6 million patients.  For this reason, encrypting the FLEET data server to protect patient health information in transmission (and in particular on mobile devices) is essential to avoiding data breaches and privacy and safety concerns. Another option would be to de-identify patients’ information in order to mitigate risks to individuals. Additionally, establishing whom patients should contact in case of a breach (either FLEET or the affected application creator directly) is key when creating a platform that works with multiple different applications. 

Conclusion
(Levin will add 2-3 sentences, referencing the FLEET metaphor)

Exhibit A (Levin will insert) 
Exhibit B
FLEET Health
Income Statement
For the Years Ending December 31, 2017, 2016, and 2015
 	 	 	 
 	12/31/17	12/31/16	12/31/15
Revenues			 
Contracts with Provider Systems (15 in 2015, 30 in 2016, and 60 in 2017)	$3,000,000 	$1,500,000 	$750,000 
Monthly Service Fee (25 in 2015, 50 in 2016, and 100 in 2017)	144,000 	72,000 	36,000 
10% of App Revenue of Apps running on Smartfhir Open Platform	 100,000 	 75,000 	 50,000 
Total Revenue	3,244,000 	1,647,000 	836,000 
 			 
Expenses			 
   Salary & Benefits Expense (a)	1,680,000 	1,200,000 	740,000 
   Supply & Equipment (Computers & Technology) Expense 	60,000 	40,000 	20,000 
   Office Rental Expense	50,000 	35,000 	20,000 
   Marketing Expense (b) 	25,000 	25,000 	25,000 
   Depreciation (of Equipment) Expense	20,000 	10,000 	5,000 
   Insurance Expense	20,000 	15,000 	10,000 
Total Expenses	1,855,000 	1,325,000 	820,000 
 			 
Net Income	$1,389,000 	$322,000 	$16,000 

Notes
(a)	Year 1 (2015) Budgeted Salaries/Benefits:
a.	Leadership Team (3 FTEs; $150,000/FTE): $450,000
b.	Five full-time coders ($50,000/FTE): $250,000
c.	Health insurance for 8 FTEs: $40,000

Year 2 (2016) Budgeted Salaries/Benefits:
a.	Leadership Team (3 FTEs; $150,000): $450,000
b.	Twelve full-time coders ($50,000/FTE): $600,000
c.	Health insurance for 15 FTEs: $75,000
d.	Additional employee benefits: $75,000

 Year 3 (2017) Budgeted Salaries/Benefits:
a.	Leadership Team (3 FTEs; $150,000): $450,000
b.	Twenty full-time coders ($50,000/FTE): $1,000,000
c.	Health insurance for 23 FTEs: $115,000
d.	Additional employee benefits: $115,000

$5,000/FTE health insurance contribution estimates based on the 2014 average employer contribution for single coverage ($4,944) from the KFF 2014 Employer Health Benefits Survey
http://files.kff.org/attachment/ehbs-2014-abstract-summary-of-findings

(b)	FLEET’s marketing budget includes funds for:
a.	 Branding and website development
b.	Travel to/cost of advertising at health care and IT conferences; and
c.	Hosting meetings with health systems and vendors
