Response
In his recent comment Wears is justified in his assertion that nation health IT goals and the intent of the HITECH act have not yet been met, while incurring extraordinary costs and frustration. The MU requirements have not brought the desired care improvements, and there are near-constant calls for us to improve usability, sharability, and adaptability. Rather than see only doom in the federal policies incentivizing EHR adoption, we can recognize that they have at least brought significantly increased use of digital technologies to US practice, and may have been a necessary painful first step in forcing medicine into the modern age. As Wears suggests, the current trajectory is frustrating, especially when contrasted to the extraordinary advancements we have seen on the web and in mobile devices. In considering a better way forward, it may be useful to examine the differences in these arenas, why the gulf exists, and how to bridge it.
 
As Wears suggests, our present reliance on ‘‘monolithic, one-size-fits-all health information technology’ vendors is deeply problematic. We now risk similarity with the defense and aerospace industries where missed deadlines, gargantuan budgets, and frequent failures are the norm. Even more, the complexity of modern healthcare's ‘task-artifact cycle’ that Wears mentions is not just one of changing the location of a buttons in an interface, though that can be important. Moving beds, prioritizing spaces, and new technologies evolve constantly in medicine. The brick and mortar of hospitals is difficult to change, we need our IT tools to adapt to the environment, not dictate how we practice. But how has the consumer area performed so much better?
 
Fortunately, there are examples of tools at our disposal to chart a way forward. Apple, Microsoft, and Android operating systems all have only reached their full potential as application platforms, by exposing their underlying functionality through well described Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). The open standards web and moderns OSs have created thriving marketplaces because of standards that allow other developers to innovate on top of a stable platform. Like the modern USB port has simplified keyboard, mice,and printers, plug and play interoperability means that best of breed vendors in every category can  be rewarded with market success, rather than single vendor solutions that lock out competition. Wear’s ‘‘polycentric, adaptable approaches’’ are only possible if we have a standardized API for medical data, through which innovative ideas and companies can build without the consent of vendors opposed to their success. On the web, you don’t need permission to just go build something better. If you build a better tool and price it fairly people will use it, regardless of what another vendor wants.
 
In order to achieve a level platform and true API style interoperability, there must be organizations that define and demand it. We must dispel any notion that interoperability will come from the ‘market’. There is no precedent in history ,including railroads, electricity, landline or mobile phones, or even the internet, for network owners to collaborate at their own expense. AOL did not willingly hand it’s users to Facebook. History indeed shows us the opposite; the most powerful companies in the world are the ones that own networks.
 
The web the famous ‘browser-wars’ of the early 2000’s show us that control of interoperability standards is key to the control of IT empires. Even today, Microsoft and Google, with Internet Explorer and Chrome, endeavor constantly stymie the Open Source efforts of the Mozilla Foundation’s Firefox browser. The House of Medicine must understand that EMR system interoperability is not just a passing frustration or occasional inefficiency, but indeed a necessary requirement for public authority over the practice of medicine.
 
The JASON report and ONC response have proposed that HL7 FHIR serve as a prospective element for interoperability. This is wise, the FHIR specification is an example of modern web-style interfacing method. Mandating that EMR vendors support data exchange using FHIR could make it much easier for both innovative project like Patrick’s can flourish, as well as best of breed vendors with user-tailored offerings that the monolithic vendors will rightly see dangerous competition. API style interfacing may be a wise element of Stage 3 meaningful use, though MU3 should be considered just the beginning of how we approach and develop this sort of functionality. (Mandl?) There are already examples of how FHIR applications can facilitate rapid product development, and real world example implementations should be supported in the near future.
 
If we can foster an environment for permissionless innovation. We will see a flourishing of experiments like the one described by Patrick. Effectively designing a solution that worked for their care setting increased efficiency, made clinicians happy, and can be made replicable across the world if we embrace the technical standards that support it. Decision tools, population management, and facile communication across care settings are all possible if we understand that data exchange standards are the essential underlying tool we need. Research. Process solutions, and insights into practice can be designed, studies, and shared in a richly competitive market where vendors can quickly adapt new solutions. Digital IT tools are the future of every facet of medicine, and permissionless IT innovation is now an essential component of permissionless healthcare innovation. Open, collaborative, and evolving, data standards are the only way we can have both.
 
------
Wears commentary is good
We are have wasted a lot, and will now have a blend of non interoperable, propriety systems embedded
These systems control how we practice
Patrick shows how we can do better
 
In order to replicated and ensure we do not become locked in we must develop standards
History shows us that control of networks and formats leads toward oligopoly and monopoly, and an anticompetitive market place hostile to innovation. Medicine and HIT leaders must understand that data, how it it defines and accessed is the sine quo non of a competitive IT marketplace, research, and patient care.
 
Data exchange standards are critical to preventing this situation, but we must embrace the fact that some organization has to set them, the market will not supply them on it’s own
If we embrace standards that enable open competition, such as the web, linux, and a change management process to
 
Even similarly credentialed workers can have very different responsibilities in different settings and need a range of adaptable tools to facilitate their work. We do not expect cooks to flip eggs with shovels, nor farmers to plow rows with spatulas, even though the farmer may want occasionally to make her own breakfast.
 
often many competitors in a given space, because people have different needs the ‘long’ tail  of use cases can be accommodated for by competitive, adaptable vendors, rather than forcing one size fits all solutions on everyone.
 
We need only look at the State HIE project failures to see what’s in store as our vendors get larger and ever more inextricable. Ironically the same MU requirements that accelerated us towards this future were designed in exactly the same sort of top-down, non-technically informed, bureaucratic process as in the defense and government sectors.
 
----
The Internet is an integral part of modern life and medicine as a whole.
The Internet is a global public resource that must remain open and accessible.
The effectiveness of the Internet as a public resource depends upon interoperability (protocols, data formats, content), innovation and decentralized participation worldwide.
Transparent community-based processes promote participation, accountability and trust.
Commercial involvement in the development of the Internet brings many benefits; a balance between commercial profit and public benefit is critical.
